---
title: Jōdo Wasan 75–81
date: "2023-12-18"
layout: post.njk
draft: true
---

These wasan conclude the contemplation sutra. There are seven in this cycle, rather than six, as usual. The last wasan summarises Other Power.
---

> **75**  
>   
> King Ajatasatru shouted, in a fit of rage,  
> “My own mother betrays me!”  
> And heinously, to strike her down,  
> He drew his sword against her.  
>   
> *Rage (shinnu)*: shin means to be angry in one’s expression; nu means to be angry in one’s heart.  

This describes one of the 5 grave offences, and how we almost inevitably have committed them due to anger caused by our blind passions. We are all angry both in our hearts and in our expressions. The Buddha taught in a sutra that anger is the one thing we should always strike down, and yet we cannot.

> **76**  
>   
> Jivaka and Candraprabha earnestly admonished the king,  
> Saying such acts were those of an outcaste,  
> And that they could not remain in the castle should he persist;  
> Thus they tried to quell his lawless impulses.  

Even others telling us we are wrong doesn't help us to quell our blind passions.

> **77**  
>   
> The minister Jivaka, with hand on his sword,  
> Stepped backward and began to take his leave;  
> Ajatasatru was thus made to discard his sword,  
> But he confined Vaidehi within the palace.  

> **78**  
>   
> Amida and Sakyamuni, employing compassionate means,  
> And Ananda, Maudgalyayana, Purna, Vaidehi,  
> Devadatta, King Ajatasatru, Bimbisara,  
> Jivaka, Candraprabha, Varsakara, and others –  

> **79**  
>   
> All of them great sages –  
> By various means, brought the most foolish and lowest  
> Of evil people to enter the Vow  
> That does not neglect people of grave offenses and transgressions.  
>   
> *Most foolish and lowest*: we who have sunken to the bottom of the great sea.  
> *Grave offenses and transgressions*: the five grave offenses and the ten transgressions.  

Even though the vow says it excludes those who have committing the five grave offences and ten transgressions, this is not really possible, since Amida's light is unobstructed, so it cannot be blocked, and shinjin is diamond-like, so it cannot be broken.

> **80**  
>   
> Since conditions for the Pure Land teaching had matured,  
> Sakyamuni and Vaidehi, manifesting compassionate means,  
> Led the minister Varsakara to bear witness  
> And King Ajatasatru to commit grave offenses.  

> **81**  
>   
> Let us overturn the three minds of self-power, whether meditative or nonmeditative,  
> Which vary with each practicer;  
> Let us aspire to enter into shinjin  
> That arises from Amida’s benefiting of others.  
>   
> *Shinjin*: the true and real shinjin of the Primal Vow.  
