---
title: Shōzōmatsu Wasan 87--93
date: "2023-12-05"
layout: post.njk
---

These are the final wasan of my chanting book (the white Hawaiian book), I'm not sure why the remaining wasan aren't included in that book. Interestingly this sequence ends in a set of seven.

These verses primarily highlight the non-dualism between Prince Shotoku and Amida Buddha.

> **87**  
>   
> Let those who realize shinjin that is Other Power,  
> In order to repay the Buddha’s benevolence,  
> Spread the two aspects of Amida’s directing of virtue  
> Throughout all the ten quarters.  

This is both a suggestion to preach, and also about how our future compassionate bodhisattva activity after we return from the Pure Land is enabled by Amida's directing of virtue. In a sense, we are enabled to help other beings realise shinjin by preaching from the sincere mind of shinijn ourselves, and as Shinran does.

> **88**  
>   
> Prince Shotoku, the world savior of great love,  
> Stays close to us, like a father;  
> Avalokitesvara, the world savior of great compassion,  
> Stays close to us, like a mother.  

Prince Shotoku and Avalokitesvara are both constantly working for us whether we are aware of it or not, both working like our parents to bring us to liberation, as are countless other helpful beings. Often we feel totally alone in this world, and that no one is there to help us or even can help us, but actually there is a huge amount of hidden dynamic activity constantly working to support our lives and our progress to liberation. Both are mentioned bc Prince Shotoku is often considered a manifestation of Avalokitesvara.

> **89**  
>   
> As the mark of his compassionate care  
> From innumerable kalpas in the past down to the present,  
> We have now been brought to accord with the inconceivable Buddha-wisdom,  
> Going beyond good and evil, pure and defiled.  

Prince Shotoku/Avalokitesvara has, at long last, after being deluded about the nature of our reality for eternity, brought us to the truth of interconnection. We go beyond good and evil, pure and defiled, since the realm of true enlightenment is beyond dualisms and distinctions, hence it is said to be formless. That said, formless is also just our concept as deluded human beings, and therefore its formlessness is also non-dual with form in this world. Therefore we have a real sense of according with the wisdom, as a tangible thing and form, in the form of the care we receive from Avalokitesvara, much like with Amida. The formless wisdom reaches out into form through its inherent nonduality.

> **90**  
>   
> Prince Shotoku was the master of the teaching in Japan;  
> Our immense debt of gratitude can hardly be repaid.  
> Take refuge in him single-heartedly  
> And never tire of reverently praising him!  

Similar to the previous verses, we thank Prince Shotoku for bringing the teaching to us. Notice that Shinran implores us to single-heartedly take refuge in him. "single-heartedly" means "only this alone" and "not other things". However in other places we see Shinran telling us to take refuge single-heartedly in Amida, the Primal Vow itself, the Pure Land, or Other Power. Therefore, all of these things, including Prince Shotoku, are the same, in that they are various conventional forms taken on by the formless wisdom or true reality. Therefore, much like the various forms of the nembutsu are considered equivalent, so are these various "deities".

> **91**  
>   
> Out of deep care for the beings of Japan,  
> Prince Shotoku, appearing from his original state,  
> Widely proclaimed the Tathagata’s compassionate Vow;  
> Let us rejoice and reverently praise him!  

Shotoku works to bring us all to liberation, by preaching the vow.

> **92**  
>   
> Through innumerable lives and countless kalpas, down to the present,  
> Each of us has received his deep care.  
> Take refuge in him single-heartedly  
> And reverently praise him always!  

Other Power has been working on us without our realisation of it for eternity into the past. We were simply too attached ot other power to accept it.

> **93**  
>   
> Prince Shotoku, in his compassionate care,  
> Protecting and sustaining us ceaselessly,  
> Urges and guides us to receive  
> Amida’s two aspects of directing virtue.  
